Create an initial documentation page for Dependabot (#40)
jenkinsci/.github: .github/dependabot.adoc

= Dependabot

WARNING: This page is under development. Contributions are welcome!

In the Jenkins project we use https://dependabot.com/[Dependabot] for automating dependency updates in our repositories.
It includes Java/Maven, Java/Gradle, JavaScript, Docker and other package manager types.

> Jenkins project repositories currently use the Github-native Dependabot and the deprecated standalone versions,
> migration is pending.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jenkins project repositories currently use the Github-native Dependabot and the deprecated standalone versions (migration is pending).
```

> This page documents jenkins-specific recommendations for using Dependabot in the Jenkins repositories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page documents Jenkins-specific recommendations for using Dependabot in the Jenkins repositories.
```

Please refer to the official https://docs.github.com/en/free-pro-team@latest/github/administering-a-repository/keeping-your-dependencies-updated-automatically[Dependabot documentation] for details and examples.

== Documentation links

* https://docs.github.com/en/free-pro-team@latest/github/administering-a-repository/enabling-and-disabling-version-updates#enabling-github-dependabot-version-updates[Enabling Dependabot in your repository]
* https://docs.github.com/en/free-pro-team@latest/github/administering-a-repository/configuration-options-for-dependency-updates[Configuration file]
* https://github.blog/2020-06-01-keep-all-your-packages-up-to-date-with-dependabot/#moving-forward-from-dependabot-com-and-dependabot-preview[Moving to GitHub-native Dependabot from Dependabot.com and dependabot-preview]

== Usage recommendations for Jenkins plugins (Maven)

* Make sure that you do not disable Maven Enforcer Plugin when using Dependabot.
  Otherwise there will be a high risk of unnoticed dependency and binary compatibility conflicts.

> * It is **not recommended** to automatically update Jenkins core to the most recent versions, because it will prevent LTS users from using them.

Reviewer: Huh?

First of all, it would be fine to enable Dependabot on Jenkins core, so long as you picked an appropriate pattern: `*.*.*` or whatever the syntax is. (And even if you left the version to float freely to weeklies, this would not prevent LTS users from running your plugin—only the _latest versions_ of your plugin, released after the last LTS branching point.)

But anyway, as far as I know it does not work; Dependabot does not grok that

```xml
<jenkins.version>2.176.3</jenkins.version>
```

is fixing the version of an artifact defined in a parent POM and is thus eligible for upgrade. It only looks for artifacts defined in the literal `pom.xml` as far as I understand it.

You say you can configure a filter to _prevent_ Dependabot from upgrading Jenkins core, but the plugin example does not do so.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense. I'd rather keep the config file smaller if this is something Dependabot does not do (anymore) I think.

Reviewer 2: BTW, the example to simply ignore Jenkins Core updates would be https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin/blob/0aff116d84574d8880530176269edaef6bc8b023/.github/dependabot.yml#L8-L11.

  See https://www.jenkins.io/doc/developer/plugin-development/choosing-jenkins-baseline/[this page] for baseline selection recommendations.
  You can configure a filter to prevent Dependabot from updating Jenkins core versions (see the examples)

> * There is a https://github.com/jenkinsci/bom/[Plugin Bill of Materials] which defines versions for many most used plugins.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* There is a https://github.com/jenkinsci/bom/[Plugin Bill of Materials] which defines versions for many plugins in common use as dependencies.
```

  If you do not have a strong version requirements, it is recommended to supply the versions through BOM instead of letting Dependabot manage each dependency version.
  It also reduces likelihood of upper bounds conflicts discovered by Maven Enforcer Plugin.
* Be careful with library dependencies, especially for popular utility libraries.

>   Requiring recent versions may sometimes cause binary conflicts with other plugins and the core.

Reviewer: This is threatening yet so vague as to be useless. If you are going to say anything, at least link to https://www.jenkins.io/doc/developer/plugin-development/dependencies-and-class-loading/#bundling-third-party-libraries

And the example link is to an obscure plugin that

* Includes library dependencies like `asm` few plugins would use.
* Is _blocking_ updates to the `jackson2-api` plugin, as well as other plugins defined in the `bom`.

Better pick a different example.

== Jenkins component Configuration Examples

* https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkinsfile-runner/blob/master/.github/dependabot.yml[Jenkinsfile Runner] - Java/Maven example
* https://github.com/jenkinsci/autograding-plugin/blob/master/.github/dependabot.yml[Autograding Plugin] - Java/Maven configuration for a plugin, with ignore filters

NOTE: More examples will be added when project migrate to a GitHub-native Dependabot implementation with a v2 configuration format

> (`.github/dependabot.yml` files and configurations in GitHub project settings).

Reviewer: I think it is worth holding off on docs until we have _better_, more typical examples.

The canonical example is far simpler: https://github.com/jenkinsci/archetypes/blob/3e5a8cc4f208c51203cac20b882ccfcba397c657/common-files/.github/dependabot.yml
